[Music]
if you work at a coffee shop
with say six other people
then the profit generated by that shop
needs to be split
seven ways it may seem like
a completely one-sided benefit to reduce
the function of the coffee shop
to redistributing the income to all the
participants equally
but there's something lost there and
it's profoundly worth understanding
whether you're left-wing or right-wing
or indifferent whether you're christian
or atheist
it's worth really reflecting on this
because it leads us to question
in an even more meaningful way how can
we
help the poor
the labels used to describe my beliefs
do not
in and of themselves encompass my
beliefs
i can tell you this though capitalism
should perish from this earth
it turns everything into a commodity
this is a brief observation but i beg
you to take it seriously
if you are a left winger who is
accustomed
to pinning blame on capitalism this
abstract concept
when you do this pause and ask yourself
how different would this particular
problem be under feudalism
under the system that existed before
capitalism
what was it what was it that was said
just here capitalism
turns everything into a commodity
before capitalism was rice
a commodity was gold
what are we talking about what is it
precisely
that capitalism can be blamed for i also
have my frustrations with this society
i struggle with on a daily basis how
terrible the education system is in
canada i struggle with on a daily basis
just the reality of living in a society
that has
massive levels of drug addiction all
around me on the streets every day
okay and yet i never let myself slip
into that lazy habit of mine
of pinning the blame on this abstraction
capitalism oh oh
was education better under feudals oh
overly what so why is it capitalism
oh gee were there no alcoholics were
there no drug addicts of the drugs
available in that day
under fuels what really is the
connection between the things we
complain about
and capitalism i'm not going to tell you
that in all cases the left wing will be
wrong or that no cases
tj the amazing atheist would be wrong
force yourself to think more deeply and
to come up with
complaints and allegations that are more
precise
because we've had more than a century of
this kind of lazy blaming of capitalism
and i'm tremendously frustrated that
nobody is interested
in identifying particular problems or
working through
particular solutions socialism to me
is the idea that the value generated by
your labor should belong to you
not to your boss i read a quotation from
confucius just recently this is
confucius
as he is remembered in the sunze
there's nothing more contemptible
nothing more pathetic
than to neglect learning when you are a
young man
and then have nothing to teach others
when you grow old
now i know i know many of us
are accustomed to regarding tj kirk the
amazing atheist
as if he's peter pan as if he is forever
the teenager who started recording
youtube videos
in his parents garage when he was still
in high school a lot of us hold him
to these juvenile standards and i think
one of the tragedies of social media
success
is that people tend to hold themselves
to such
low standards this is maybe
stereotypically
or more overtly true with good-looking
females
on the internet that they become
successful and popular
at an early age when they're
good-looking and they just never
really make the effort to develop
themselves intellectually
i think it happens just as often with
men they maybe are just
uh a little bit more evasive they're
maybe a little bit better at wearing the
mask
of concealing how juvenile they've
they've really remained would it be
unreasonable
for tj kirk the amazing atheist after
all this time
to look up the history and definition
of the word socialism before making this
video
would it be unreasonable for him to even
know the etymology
the first coinage first usage and how
the tournament changed over time
maybe at this stage of his career having
for decades
lectured on politics on the internet
having gone from being a young man
to becoming an old man would it be
unreasonable for us to look to him and
really
really expect him to have something much
more meaningful to offer here
now lee said that my video was the
economics equivalent of creationism
that me talking about economics is like
some dumbass fundy [ __ ] uh
talking about evolution because i don't
really understand
economics in fact i have such a poor
understanding of economics
that it can be compared to a creationist
understanding of evolution
that's how horrible my grasp of
economics is
and i've heard that sentiment echoed
over and over and over again
the amazing atheist has been both a
positive and a negative
influence on me in my channel if you
look way back to the beginning of this
channel
there's one video that is discussing
apotheosis
the history of buddhism christianity
comparative religion
from an atheist perspective by the way i
could have taken this
whole channel in that direction of
having a disembodied
impersonal voice presenting you with
text
charts illustrations powerpoint
presentations
having kind of pseudo-academic objective
style of presenting information on
youtube and yes you know
for better or for worse i looked at the
kind of
raw emotionally honest immediacy
of what the amazing atheist was doing on
youtube
and i thought deeply about all of the
disadvantages
of giving a presentation at an academic
conference
writing a formal peer-reviewed paper you
know even a footnoted essay
you know within the university system i
thought what
is the point of reproducing all the
disadvantages
of that more academic approach here on
the internet on this new thing
on youtube i'm reaching out to an
audience this way and i looked at people
like tj kirk the amazing atheist i
thought there's something they're doing
right
that the university system is doing
wrong there's something there i can
learn from
and for that i am frankly forever
grateful
to the amazing atheist with that having
been said
if you're a regular viewer of my channel
you will be aware that the question of
what is socialism
what is capitalism and what is feudalism
what is another social system
comes down to the question of ownership
socialism
is the doctrine the theory and the
practice
of public ownership of the means of
production
if you don't want to save the means of
production which is dripping with
marxist connotations you could just say
stuff
all right if the government now decides
that in response to the challenges of
global warming
they're going to eliminate the free
market they're going to eliminate
capitalism from the generation of
electricity
that they're going to make all power
plants government owned
government operated right that would be
the socialization
of the generation of electricity there
would be advantages
and there would be disadvantages in the
short term many people might applaud
this effort
right in the short term even it might
mean better pay or wages
for some of the lowest paid staff who
are currently working at you know
nuclear power plants coal burning power
plants whatever type of power plants you
got where
it could improve workers there would be
advantages in terms of the government
being able to
disregard what the whims of captains of
industry corporate leaders and just
command that part of the economy to
transform itself from using one type of
power generation
to another and there are disadvantages
over the long term one of the most
important
is the disappearance of innovation
itself
what you're going to have is a
government department
that operates the generation of
electricity in much the same way
that government departments operate the
military
and let me just note the military
has its own healthcare sector the
military has its own
old folks homes retirement homes often
enough you're going to find the military
has day care centers
you know for the children of people on
active duty
military has to generate electricity too
right
with the united states military you
actually have a miniature
socialist society or socialist economy
existing within the united states of
america
if you want to get a good pragmatic
sense
of what the advantages and disadvantages
living in a socialist economy are living
in a command economy
you can just stop and visit a military
base
it's very very rare to hear someone say
to you
i wish i hope when i get older
that i'm going to be able to stay in the
old folks home
provided for veterans by the military
it's very rare to hear someone say
the best hospital the best doctors you
can get
in this town the military military base
the military hospital
right it's very rare to hear anyone say
the best haircut they ever had in their
life
was at the barber shop on the military
base it's very rare to hear anyone say
that the
food is any good on the military base
all right socialism is not impossible
it's not the bogeyman it's not something
to be afraid of
it's something we need to start thinking
about in a much more nuanced way
because people are presenting it as an
incredibly simplistic solution
to some incredibly complicated problems
with terrible
long-term implications i think in some
instances
it is fairly unambiguous
if you work at a coffee shop
with say six other people
then the profit generated by that shop
needs to be split
seven ways broadly speaking
in terms of both morality and aesthetics
what i tend to have in common with left
wingers
is just a sincere concern for the plight
of the poor even a kind of
bias where i tend to judge how well
society
works in terms of how well it works
for the poorest of the poor but
there's nothing distinctively left-wing
above us you can meet
right-wingers you can meet conservative
christians who have decades of
experience
doing charity work working with the
homeless working with the poor
working with the downtrodden oppressive
society or helping people who've just
gotten out of prison
you can meet conservatives and
right-wingers who actually share
this kind of priority placed on
the plight of the poor concern for how
well society
works for the poor and i i may not even
have that in common with the majority of
people on the left
when i went to a country like thailand
my whole
concern my whole evaluation of thai
society
was how well is this country working for
the poorest
10 percent and it would seem to me
laughable it would seem to be ridiculous
to say oh well the majority of people
are happy here we're the wealthiest
10 of people are happy here and whether
we're looking at
communist china present day your 2020
or we're looking at vladimir putin's
russia or if we're looking at the
peculiar hybrid democracy of japan
it just seems to me outrageously
laughable
to say how can you complain can't you
see
that the social system is working great
for the people at the top can't you see
that the wealthiest 10
and let's admit it the health care
system you have in the united states of
america
it works really well for the wealthiest
10 percent i've seen estimates putting
it up to like 70
like 70 of people in america are happy
with their health care system and yeah
that's a little bit shocking and a
little bit hard to handle
but then you have to challenge yourself
you have to ask to what extent am i
biased to what extent am i
only considering the plight of the poor
how well does america's
education system work for anybody or
everybody right
again i'm biased i'm mostly thinking
about
the people who can't afford to pay
tuition
right and and really in our assessment
and our evaluation
we have to think also about how well it
works or how poorly it works
for those who can i knew a young man
who was born a very poor family
they were some combination of abusive
alcoholic and religious maniacs
i didn't press for details he finished
high school
he went straight into the workforce
didn't go to college
he got safety training
that allowed him to get a job uh
as a janitor on a military base
and then he later he took that safety
training and upgraded i think he he got
a job
working on the working on the floor of a
sawmill
all these jobs in canada it's like you
have to be able to do cpr
and respond this very short career he
saved up his money
and then he bought an airplane ticket to
asia where i met him
and he went from country to country
living as an english teacher
he started in india he went over land
from
india to china lived in each of these
places sometimes for a year sometimes
for a number of months
he went down into laos and cambodia he
got a girl pregnant in japan
i recall yeah he promised he promised
the girl he'd settle down with her but
she just had to have an abortion
this guy this guy saw the world he never
owned a car
all right everywhere he went he had no
health care
he paid in cash when i was with him i
remember he had some health problems he
was talking to doctors and
everything was paid for in cash i think
in most of these countries
he never had a bank account you know
living a very meager existence right
i'm not going to claim to you that this
is a normal
or typical representative of how
capitalism works but neither is the
amazing atheist
example of a set of employees at a
coffee shop
there is no typical example right we
have to think
about what's possible right what
options people have that same young man
could have buckled down and become a
dentist and had a steady income
for the rest of his life and instead
what can i say he inherited the world
right he saw the world
he lived his english teacher he lived in
this strange way he probably returned to
canada with only a dime in his pocket
and went back to working a similar job
to what he had before
right i know that people take this
concept
of economic freedom and risk
and personal responsibility and they
kind of weaponize it
just to support donald trump to support
whatever the political cause
of the moment is right but it's actually
really important
that we think about this you know in a
nuanced way
there are thousands of nuances that we
don't have the time to explore here the
devil
after all is in the details what if some
workers are part-time
and some are full uh full-time you know
what if
some employees have more highly
specialized skills than others that they
worked hard to acquire
these questions and more need to be
addressed in a way that can be
generally perceived by all as equitable
and is fair our analysis of these seven
employees working together in a coffee
shop
can no more be scaled up to represent
what's good for society as a whole
than the analysis of this one young man
who ran away to become
an english teacher travel the world in
southeast asia
the analysis of the employees in the
coffee shop is just as difficult to
generalize about
as the career of a successful stock
broker
a middle man whose whole life consists
of buying high
and selling low or conformist kid who
just decides to buckle down and become a
dentist so we can have that regular
paycheck for the rest of his life one of
my grandmothers was a dentist and hated
it
he did it every day resented it
regretted it for the rest of her life
wishing something more meaningful the
rest of her life really
even as an old woman after retirement
she was bitter about it she felt she'd
ruined her life by becoming a dentist
you know she lived in a condo with a
swimming pool she would have given it
all up
she would have rather lived a life like
that reckless young man
who ran away for real she said that
all right the coffee shop
who pays the rent have you ever taken
one moment to look tj
at just how expensive the rent is for a
commercial space
on the ground floor that can house a
coffee shop who bought the equipment
who paid for the renovations who put the
sign up over the window
have you ever stopped to look at how
much that
investment cost and how many years
the coffee shop would have to be
successful while paying everyone a
fair wage to just save up the money to
pay back
that initial investment it is not
possible
to divide the earnings of the coffee
shop seven ways
it is also not possible to divide the
risk
seven ways because whoever put that
money down whoever is paying
thousands and thousands of dollars a
month for the rent and the electricity
and the water
and whoever went into debt hundreds of
thousands of dollars
to do the initial renovation and buy the
espresso machine and the furniture
and deal with all the government
paperwork by the way to
whoever did all the licensing whoever
invested in that job and is paying the
taxes they're unbelievable in canada you
would not believe how much property tax
you you pay on a coffee shop
looked to do at one point because you
were thinking about opening up small
vegan bakery
it's mind-blowing okay whoever is paying
all that money is genuinely
genuinely taking the risk that they will
never earn it back
that they will themselves go bankrupt
that they will not be able to pay back
their creditors
they are putting their neck on the line
and you know what the other problem is
looking to the future innovation
right who who is going to save up money
from the profit at that coffee shop to
invest even in something as simple
as advertising to invest in some
new equipment for a new product right
oh gee we make espresso we have a
blender
what if we get ice cream and we start
making a milkshake with espresso and ice
cream
going into the blender oh and now that
we have this new product
maybe we have to pay to advertise it who
is going to make that investment
who's going to engage in that innovation
who is going to take on that risk
all right it may seem like um
a completely one-sided benefit to reduce
the function of the coffee shop
to redistributing the income to all the
participants
equally but there's something lost there
and
it's profoundly worth understanding
whether you're left-wing or right-wing
or indifferent whether you're christian
or atheist
it's worth really reflecting on this
because it leads us to question
in an even more meaningful way how can
we
help the poor i think the most
fundamental delusion
tj has been burdened with since his
teenage years
is the idea that you help the poor
by beating up on private enterprise
by doing something to harm the
profit-making
part of the economy and the truth is you
help the poor
by actually helping the poor
as much as i may despise right-wing
christian conservatives i think that
they have a very different sense
of what progress means precisely because
they have more hands-on experience
with at least trying to get out
and help the poor and let me ask at this
point
tj i made an earlier video talking about
the fact that you
are a fantastically wealthy individual
youtube has certainly been very kind to
you in this calculus system
do you have any of that experience tj
did you ever get interested in
the reality of what it would be like in
a hands-on way
to try to build a better society in the
simplest sense
to get out and start helping the poor
now do i believe
that everyone in the society should be
completely equal
with equal access to all resources
no i believe that all human beings
are deserving of food clothing
shelter health care basic necessities
i think that beyond that a person's
will use the word wealth for lack of a
better word
a person's wealth should be determined
by the value
that they create
how that value is determined and who
gets to determine it
are valid questions now i want to talk
about
value if i could because i think that a
lot of the problem
that people have with the argument that
i made has to do
with value another major problem with
the free market argument and this is the
main one
is that it ignores objective values
let's say it's a locket and it is
generally perceived by everyone to be
worth about 30 dollars
but it has immense subjective value to
me because it used to belong to my
father who is now passed away
uh and i desperately want this locket
and i would be willing to pay
so much money for it is it fair for him
to come and sell it to me for 200
because he knows he can get that out of
me is it fair for him to exploit me
is it fair for him to use my
grief and my desire for this item
in order to rip me off of my money so
let's take that situation out of the
microcosm and apply it to the macrocosm
there is a huge population of people who
all
perceive uh some particular item as
being worth
a hundred dollars uh and there is a
giant corporation
who owns the rights to all of this item
and they're willing to sell it to these
people for 100
even though the objective value the
baseline value
is far less than that so if lee doran
is an extortionist for ripping me off
for a locket that had sentimental value
to me then why is that giant corporation
not an extortionist and not a defrauder
by charging
these people more for this item than
it's objectively worth
a person's wealth should be determined
by the value
that they create
how that value is determined and who
gets to determine it
are valid questions however
the general principle i believe is sound
and that is why i call myself a leftist
now you may choose
to say that i am not a leftist
i don't care my beliefs are the same
regardless of the label
being applied to them i'm not interested
in being part of anyone's club
i'm interested in advancing ideas that
create a more
just equitable and free society